The President:
Over the last week, my administration has taken several
precautions to address the
challenge posed by the 2009 H1N1
flu virus.
Today, I'd like to take a few
minutes to explain why.
This is a new strain of the flu
virus,
and because we haven't developed
an immunity to it,
it has more potential to cause
us harm.
Unlike the various strains of
animal flu that have emerged in
the past, it's a flu that's
spreading from human to human.
This creates the potential for a
pandemic,
which is why we are acting
quickly and aggressively.
This H1N1 flu has had its
biggest impact in Mexico,
where it's claimed a number of
lives and infected
hundreds more.
Thus far, the strain in this
country that has infected people
in at least nineteen states has
not been as potent or as deadly.
We can't know for certain why
that is,
which is why we are taking all
necessary precautions in the
event that the virus does turn
into something worse.
This is also why the Centers for
Disease Control has recommended
that schools and child care
facilities with confirmed cases
of the virus close for up to
fourteen days.
This is why we urge employers to
allow infected employees to take
as many sick days as necessary.
If more schools are forced to
close,
we've also recommended that both
parents and businesses think
about contingency plans if
children do have to stay home.
We've asked every American to
take the same steps you would
take to prevent any other flu:
keep your hands washed;
cover your mouth when you cough;
stay home from work if you're
sick; and keep your children
home from school
if they're sick.
The White House has launched pages in Facebook,
MySpace, and Twitter to support
the ongoing efforts by the CDC
to update the public as quickly
and effectively as possible.
And as our scientists and
researchers learn more
information about this virus
every day,
the guidance we offer will
likely change.
What will not change is the fact
that we'll be making every
recommendation based on the best
science possible.
We will also continue investing
in every resource necessary to
treat this virus and prevent a
wider outbreak.
The good news is that the
current strain of H1N1 can be
defeated by a course of
antiviral treatment that we
already have on hand.
We began this week with 50
million courses of this
treatment in the Strategic
National Stockpile.
Over the course of the last few
days,
we've delivered one-quarter of that stockpile to states so that
they are prepared to treat
anyone who is infected with
this virus.
We then purchased an additional
thirteen million treatments to
refill our strategic stockpile.
Out of an abundance of caution,
I've also asked Congress for
$1.5 billion if it's needed to
purchase additional antivirals,
emergency equipment, and the
development of a vaccine that
can prevent this virus as we
prepare for the next flu season
in the fall.
The Recovery Act that Congress
enacted in February also
includes expansions of community
health centers,
a dramatic increase in the
training of health care workers
and nurses, and $300 million for
the development and deployment
of vaccines - all of which will
help us meet this threat.
Finally, thanks to the work that
the last administration and
Congress did to prepare for a
possible avian flu pandemic in
2005, states and the federal
government have fully operable
influenza readiness plans and
are better prepared to deal with
such a challenge than ever
before.
It is my greatest hope and
prayer that all of these
precautions and preparations
prove unnecessary.
But because we have it within
our power to limit the potential
damage of this virus, we have a
solemn and urgent responsibility
to take the necessary steps.
I would sooner take action now
than hesitate and face graver
consequences later.
I have no higher priority as
President of the United States
than the safety and security of
the American people,
and I will do whatever is necessary to protect
this country.
So I want to thank every
American for their patience and
understanding during this
developing challenge,
and I promise that this
government will continue
speaking clearly and honestly
about the steps we're taking
to meet it.
Thank you.